# My interest in Rigveda, Sanskrit and ancient India
Recently I came across a book called "Metallurgy in India: A Retrospective"; with editors: P. Ramachandra Rao and N.G. Goswami (ISBN: 81-87053-56-7); published in 2001 by NML Jamshedpur. The 8th chapter of this book has the title "India's Contribution to the Mining, Extraction and Refining of Gold: Some Observations Related to the Pre-Christian Era" and was written by R.K. Dube. Under the heading of "Alluvial Placer Deposit" he writes: "The Rgveda (10.75.8) mentions that the river Sindhu (Indus) contains gold..." When I read this, I thought to myself, "Okay, but the verse does not give any hint of alluvial placer deposit. Which part of the river contains this gold? Is the gold buried under the soil under the river?" To answer my question, he then wrote, "In another reference in the Rgveda (8.2.18), it has been mentioned that the path, i.e., both banks, of the river Sindhu contains gold." This made me interested in the book-8 more than any other books of the ancient text. However, when I read the second hymn of the book, I found no such mention as Dube had written. I stopped reading the book right in that second chapter - thinking that some sort of fraudulence was going on to support a claim strongly. 

Who was the fraud? Dube? I am not saying that a professor cannot do something this unethical (or maybe that's what I am saying) but a professor of IIT Kanpur? My study shortly diverged from Rigveda to R.K. Dube. He has a lot of research papers, but I do not think I hold the qualifications to read any academic paper, let alone one written by someone from the Department of Material Science, so my target was some sort of articles, if any written for general audience, by Dube. Truth be told, I could not find any then. 

I started studying about metallurgy with the unrealistic goal to be able to read Dube's research papers someday and that is when I came across a portal called [vedic heritage](https://vedicheritage.gov.in/) initiated under the aegis of Ministry of Culture, Government of India. Guess what I found - a piece of writing that had been published in 2015 in Financial Chronicle - written by Dr. R K Dube!
In the second paragraph of the paper he wrote a line similar to that in that ISBN 81-87053-56-7 book: "Another Rigveda hymn (8.26.18) states that the path of the river Sindhu contains gold, and the word used for it is *hiranyavartanih*." Hymn-26 of the same, my favourite book-8. I checked and yes, it is not a wrong reference. I do not know what happened in ISBN: 81-87053-56-7 - may be some typing mistake? 

I guess all these started from metallurgy and can you really blame me for going this far - from trying to "expose" a respectable professor (my apologies) to discovering a favourite hymn in a shruti - just for a book about metallurgy? Did you know? H. H. Wilson, the first person to translate Rigveda to English language was attached to the mint at Calcutta, because of his vast knowledge about metallurgy!
